Documentation ag (#70)
Rappsilber-Laboratory/XiSearch: README.md

## xiSEARCH 1.7.6.7 documentation

XiSearch is implemented as a Java Application. Therefore it requires that java is installed. We recommend to use the the latest update of JAVA version 8 or above. 
The latest version as binary can be downloaded from https://rappsilberlab.org/downloads/

### Background

> xiSEARCH is a search engine for crosslinking mass spectrometry (crosslinking MS). It supports data acquired with ThermoFisher Orbitrap instruments (.raw format) that have been converted to peak. files (.mgf format), for example with [ProteoWizard MsConvert](https://proteowizard.sourceforge.io/). It then searches the peakfiles against a sequence database in .fasta format to identify crosslinked peptide pairs from mass spectra. The search algorithm uses a target-decoy approach outlined in XXX, which enables false-discovery rate (FDR) estimation. The FDR calculation on the xiSEARCH result is performed by xiFDR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
xiSEARCH is a search engine for crosslinking mass spectrometry (crosslinking MS). It supports data acquired with ThermoFisher Orbitrap instruments (.raw format) that have been converted to peak files (.mgf format), for example with [ProteoWizard MsConvert](https://proteowizard.sourceforge.io/). It then searches the peakfiles against a sequence database in .fasta format to identify crosslinked peptide pairs from mass spectra. The search algorithm uses a target-decoy approach outlined in XXX, which enables false-discovery rate (FDR) estimation. The FDR calculation on the xiSEARCH result is performed by xiFDR.
```

Do you want a reference for target-decoy in general or something that states how it actually works in xi?

Author: your call- i would say your 2 publications on T-D?

Reviewer: added my two FDR papers as reference

Author: why no more link to rappsilber lab?

Author: ah github confused me

> xiSEARCH is a flexible search engine that allows for extensive configuration of the search options and of the search scoring methods in crosslink identification. Nevertheless, its design suits best data acquired at high resolution in MS1 and MS2- in the Rappsilber lab, we acquire with 120k resolution in ms1 and 60k resolution ms2. Currently, xiSEARCH does not support MS3 approaches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
xiSEARCH is a flexible search engine that allows for extensive configuration of the search options and of the search scoring methods in crosslink identification. Nevertheless, its design suits best data acquired at high resolution in MS1 and MS2 - in the Rappsilber lab, we acquire with 120k resolution in ms1 and 60k resolution ms2. Currently, xiSEARCH does not support MS3 approaches.
```

The xiSEARCH algorithm is described in detail in [Mendez, Fischer *et al.* Mol. Sys. Bio. 2019](https://www.embopress.org/doi/full/10.15252/msb.20198994). The xiSEARCH scoring function is made up of several terms accounting for the goodness of fit of the spectra to the peptide pair selected from the database, including fragment mass error, percentage intensity explained, number of fragments, number of crosslinked fragments.

Scoring happens in three stages: 

1. alpha candidates are selected and scored

> 2. top n aplpha candidates are taken and all matching beta-candidates will be selected and prescored

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. top n alpha candidates are taken and all matching beta-candidates (according to the precursormass) will be selected and prescored as pairs
```

3. the top X of these are then fully matched and scored

> The scoring function is applied to explain each spectrum with a target-target pair, a target-decoy pair, a decoy-decoy pair, a linear target sequence or a linear decoy sequence. Error control by false discovery rate estimation is then performed in a separate step with xiFDR.

Reviewer: at this point xisearch does not care about target or decoy - so it could well be that only decoys are considered or only targets.

Reviewer: Actually it does the full scoring on the top-x alpha-beta-candidates + all possible linear matches

Author: then the same should be changed in the default config, which is where this text comes from. We should also include that figure i mentioned here in the readme...

Reviewer: Not sure where you found that text - as for the figure as it is a pull request from your fork - ithink you probably need to add teh file: ![xi_search_strategy](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6330440/201888945-7f9bafbb-7b96-47e0-8e22-919f6bec7c7e.jpg)

Author: right it is not from there... i remember copy pasting that, though it does read similar to the legend of https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6753376/ fig EV6.

> The scoring function is applied to explain each spectrum with a target-target pair, a target-decoy pair, a decoy-decoy pair, a linear target sequence or a linear decoy sequence. Error control by false discovery rate estimation is then performed in a separate step with xiFDR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The scoring function is applied to explain each spectrum with without considering if a peptide is target or decoy. In result for a false positive match the chance to to be target-target, target-decoy or a decoy decoy match should be 1:2:1.  Error control by false discovery rate estimation is then performed in a separate step with xiFDR.
```

Reviewer: Should we add something about decoy generation? A.k. 
```
Decoys are by default generated by reversal of the target proteins followed by shifting of the digestible residues by one amino-acid. If a peptide is already present as a target peptide the decoy peptide sequence will be shuffled. If every permutation is already seen as a target peptide, then the decoy peptide will be dropped. In effect the decoy database can underestimate the false positive rate for very short peptides. This is one of the reasons, why in xiFDR by default matches involving peptides shorter then 5 amino-acids are ignored.
```

Reviewer: actually it is about 1:2:1 for both peptides random. for single peptide random it is 1:1:0. Guess that gets to complicated to write in a single sentence

### The interface
the interface provides several tabs to configure your search. In the first tab (Run) the result file (result) and optionally a for writing out full annotations of the spectra (peak annotations) can be defined.

In the second tab (Peak Lists) the peak lists to be searched can be defined. Supported formats are mgf-files as generated from msconvert or apl-files as produced by MaxQuant. For mgf-files of other sources the config might need to be adapted to define how to read out a run-name and a scan-number from the TITLE= tags in the files.

The third tab defines the FASTA files to be searched. Multiple files can be defined. 

The fourth tab provides the search configuration. Here all parameters are defined as a in form of a text file. A default config is provided as an example that defines a search with BS3 as cross-linker and Carboxyamidomethylation on Cystein as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. Each option contains a short description of what it does and how to change it.

> When everything is configured as desired then start-button on the first tab can be pressed to start the search.

Reviewer: That whole section is of an old version. and probably should go

Author: then it goes :)

Depending on the size of the sequence-database and the number of search threads the start-script might need to be adapted to permit xi to use a larger amount of memory (-Xmx option). This should not exceed the amount of free memory available without running xi. E.g. if a computer has 8GB of RAM but per default 5 are used by other programs then Xi should get at most 3GB as otherwise part of the programm will be swapped out to disk and in effect run extremely slow. For searches involving dozens of spectra and hundreds of proteins, we recommend running xiSEARCH on an HPC node with large Xmx values or a server, as the RAM requirements increase with the square of the size of the database. As an example, we run searches for [this publication](https://pubs.acs.org/doi/full/10.1021/acs.jproteome.9b00541) with -Xmx 256G, specifying 256Gb of RAM.

# Setting up a search in the interface

1. Upload files

> The "files" tab allows for the upload of the mass spec data in .mgf format and the database in .fasta format. The path to where the results of the search are written also needs to be set. The decoy database is automatically generated from the uploaded .fasta fikes. However, the user has the liberty to define a custom decoy database by designing one of the fasta files as the decoy database instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "files" tab allows for the upload of the mass spec data in .mgf format and the database in .fasta format. The path to where the results of the search are written also needs to be set. The decoy database is automatically generated from the uploaded .fasta files. However, the user has the liberty to define a custom decoy database by marking one of the FASTA files as the decoy database instead.If a FASTA file is marked as decoy - no additional decoys will be auto-generated. For the correct estimate of FDR for self links and heteromeric links proteins in the target and the decoy database  need to  match each other by having the same accession - just prepending a REV_ for the decoy proteins
```

2. Setting options - basic config.

We will cover the advanced config in the "setting up a search on the command line" section.

##### crosslinker selection

> Normally, all searches are performed with 2 crosslinkers selected: the crosslinker used in the sample (be it BS3, DSS, SDA or other) and "NonCovalent", which allows the search engine to match spectra with a pair of co-eluting and co-fragmenting linear peptides, which is a common source of misinterpretation of crosslinking MS spectra. Thus, the "multiple" crosslinker box should be ticked and then both the crosslinker of interest and "nonCovalent" (near the bottom) should be selected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Normally, all searches are performed with 2 crosslinkers selected: the crosslinker used in the sample (be it BS3, DSS, SDA or other) and "NonCovalent", which allows the search engine to match spectra with a pair of co-eluting and co-fragmenting linear peptides that are not actually crosslinked. This is a common source of misinterpretation of crosslinking MS spectra. Thus, the "multiple" crosslinker box should be ticked and then both the crosslinker of interest and "nonCovalent" (near the bottom) should be selected.
```

#### Enzyme
Select an enzyme or multiple enzyme used to digest the sample. 

| Preset                   | Description                             | 
|--------------------------|-----------------------------------------| 
| Trypsin                  |                                         |
| Trypsin/P                | trypsin not restricted by proline       |
| V8                       |                                         |
| Lys-C                    |                                         |
| Lys-C/P                  |                                         |
| trypsin/P + V8           |                                         |
| proteinaseK              |                                         |
| proteinaseK & trypsin\P  |                                         |

> | Chymotrypsin             |                                         |

Author: in the GUI, these options are full of typos and inconsistencies. Chymotrypsin is sometimes chemotrypsin, multiple digestions are sometimes with a slash and other times with a +... consider fixing

Reviewer: I will go through the BasicConfigEntries.conf file and have a look

| Trypsin+Chymotrypsin     |                                         |
| Trypsin/P + ASP-N (D)    |                                         |
| Asp-N(DE)                |                                         |
| Trypsin/P+ASP-N(DE)      |                                         |
| Trypsin/P+ASP-N(E)       |                                         |
| Elastase                 |                                         |
| Elastase & Trypsin       |                                         |
| Trypsin/P & Exopeptidase |                                         |
| Tryp-N                   |                                         |
| No digestion             | for example used for synthetic peptides |

#### Miscleavages
The number of miscleavages to consider in the search. Given that crosslinked peptides generate spectra that are similar to spectra of long, miscleaved linear peptides, we suggest setting this number to 3, or even 4 if the database and set of modifications included in the search is small. This allows for alternative explanations of crosslinked spectra with miscleaved peptides.

#### Number of Threads

> Number of threads to be used for the search. The memory usage scales with the number of threads. If the program runs out of memory, consider re-launching xiSEARCH with increased memory via the -Xmx option (see above).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Number of threads to be used for the search. The memory usage scales with the number of threads. If the program runs out of memory, consider re-launching xiSEARCH with increased memory via the -Xmx option (see above) and/or reduce the number of threads.
```

In the modifications tab, it is important to select the appropriate crosslinker modifications for your sample. In particular, loop modifications and hydrolysed crosslinkers are very common for both NHS-ester and diazirine crosslinkers. If a modification is selected in variable or variable-linear, it should not be selected in the other tab. Remember that the search problem (and therefore the memory and time necessary for the search) scales exponentially with the number of proteins in the database and their modifications.

#### Ions
Which fragment ion types to consider in the search.

#### Losses
Which fragment losses to consider in the search.

### Custom config
Here, additional configurations may be set using the text syntax as in the advanced config or in a config file used by the command line version of xiSEARCH (see next section)

### Do FDR setting 
If the "Do FDR" box is ticked, xiFDR will automatically be run at the end of xiSEARCH. We tend to leave this option off, as we prefer to run xiFDR in a standalone process to have access to more advanced FDR filtering options.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Changing or adding new entries to the config-gui
The  "BasicConfigEntries.conf" contains all the selectable config values. In this file new entries for crosslinker, enzymes, modifications and losses can be freely defined. The file contains sections for crosslinker, modifications, losses, ions,enzymes and custom settings. Each section has a short description on how to add new entries.

```

Reviewer: Not sure if this is the right place to add this - but I think it should appear somewhere

## xiSEARCH 1.7.6.7 documentation

XiSearch is implemented as a Java Application. Therefore it requires that java is installed. We recommend to use the the latest update of JAVA version 8 or above. 
The latest version as binary can be downloaded from https://rappsilberlab.org/downloads/

### Background

> xiSEARCH is a search engine for crosslinking mass spectrometry (crosslinking MS). It supports data acquired with ThermoFisher Orbitrap instruments (.raw format) that have been converted to peak files (.mgf format), for example with [ProteoWizard MsConvert](https://proteowizard.sourceforge.io/). It then searches the peakfiles against a sequence database in .fasta format to identify crosslinked peptide pairs from mass spectra. The search algorithm uses a target-decoy approach outlined in  [Fischer _et al._ 2017](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.6b03745) and [Fischer _et al._ 2018]([url](https://doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0196672))  , which enables false-discovery rate (FDR) estimation. The FDR calculation on the xiSEARCH result is performed by xiFDR.

Reviewer: I would phrase that less stringent to thermo only. It was also used with e.g. timstof acquisitions.
```suggestion
xiSEARCH is a search engine for crosslinking mass spectrometry (crosslinking MS). It is mainly tested with data acquired with ThermoFisher Orbitrap instruments (.raw format) that have been converted to peak files (.mgf format), for example with [ProteoWizard MsConvert](https://proteowizard.sourceforge.io/) - but any highresolution data in mgf-format are likely to be usable. It then searches the peakfiles against a sequence database in .fasta format to identify crosslinked peptide pairs from mass spectra. The search algorithm uses a target-decoy approach outlined in  [Fischer _et al._ 2017](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.6b03745) and [Fischer _et al._ 2018]([url](https://doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0196672))  , which enables false-discovery rate (FDR) estimation. The FDR calculation on the xiSEARCH result is performed by xiFDR.
```

The xiSEARCH algorithm is described in detail in [Mendez, Fischer *et al.* Mol. Sys. Bio. 2019](https://www.embopress.org/doi/full/10.15252/msb.20198994). The xiSEARCH scoring function is made up of several terms accounting for the goodness of fit of the spectra to the peptide pair selected from the database, including fragment mass error, percentage intensity explained, number of fragments, number of crosslinked fragments.

Scoring happens in three stages: 

1. alpha candidates are selected and scored
2. top n alpha candidates are taken and all matching beta-candidates (according to the precursormass) will be selected and prescored as pairs
3. the top X of these are then fully matched and scored

The scoring function is applied to explain each spectrum with without considering if a peptide is target or decoy. In result for a false positive match the chance to to be target-target, target-decoy or a decoy decoy match should be 1:2:1.  Error control by false discovery rate estimation is then performed in a separate step with xiFDR.

### The interface

> the interface provides several tabs to configure your search. In the first tab (Run) the result file (result) and optionally a for writing out full annotations of the spectra (peak annotations) can be defined.
> 
> In the second tab (Peak Lists) the peak lists to be searched can be defined. Supported formats are mgf-files as generated from msconvert or apl-files as produced by MaxQuant. For mgf-files of other sources the config might need to be adapted to define how to read out a run-name and a scan-number from the TITLE= tags in the files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The interface provides several tabs. The first two tabs are the main ones for configuring the search. The first one (Files) defines the input and output, i.e. the the peaklist- and fasta-files to be search and where to write the result. 
The second one (Parameters) configures the actual search. The third one (Feedback) provides the log of the current search and provides a means to contact the developers. The fourth tab contains the change log/Version history. 
```
